# MATAR
MATAR is a part of the ELEMENTS library (FCI# C20058) and it underpins the routines implemented in ELEMENTS.  MATAR is available in a stand-alone directory outside of the ELEMENTS directory.  

MATAR addresses the need for simple, fast, and memory-efficient multi-dimensional data representations for dense and sparse storage that arise with numerical methods and in software applications. The data representations must perform equally well across multiple computer architectures, including CPUs and GPUs. For this purpose, we developed MATAR, a C++ software library that allows for simple creation and use of intricate data structures that is also portable across disparate architectures using Kokkos. The performance aspect is achieved by forcing contiguous memory layout (or as close to contiguous as possible) for multi-dimensional and multi-size dense or sparse MATrix and ARray (hence, MATAR) types. Results show that MATAR has the capability to improve memory utilization, performance, and programmer productivity in scientific computing. This is achieved by fitting more work into the available memory, minimizing memory loads required, and by loading memory in the most efficient order. 

The dense and sparse storage types are the foundation for the ELEMENTS library, which contains mathematical functions to support a very broad range of element types including: linear, quadratic, and cubic serendipity elements in 2D and 3D; high-order spectral elements; and a linear 4D element. MATAR can can be used outside of ELEMENTS. An unstructured high-order mesh class is available in ELEMENTS and it takes advantage of MATAR for efficient access of various mesh entities. 

